	1 KING HENRY IV


	DRAMATIS PERSONAE


KING HENRY	the Fourth. (KING HENRY IV:)


HENRY,
Prince of Wales	(PRINCE HENRY:)	|
		| sons of the King
JOHN of Lancaster	(LANCASTER:)	|


WESTMORELAND:

SIR WALTER BLUNT:

THOMAS PERCY	Earl of Worcester. (EARL OF WORCESTER:)

HENRY PERCY	Earl of Northumberland. (NORTHUMBERLAND:)

HENRY PERCY	surnamed HOTSPUR, his son. (HOTSPUR:)

EDMUND MORTIMER	Earl of March. (MORTIMER:)

RICHARD SCROOP	Archbishop of York. (ARCHBISHOP OF YORK:)

ARCHIBALD	Earl of Douglas. (DOUGLAS:)

OWEN GLENDOWER:

SIR RICHARD VERNON	(VERNON:)

SIR JOHN FALSTAFF	(FALSTAFF:)

SIR MICHAEL	a friend to the Archbishop of York.

POINS:

GADSHILL:

PETO:

BARDOLPH:

FRANCIS	a waiter.

LADY PERCY	wife to Hotspur, and sister to Mortimer.

LADY MORTIMER	daughter to Glendower,
	and wife to Mortimer.

MISTRESS QUICKLY	hostess of a tavern in Eastcheap. (Hostess:)

	Lords, Officers, Sheriff, Vintner, Chamberlain,
	Drawers, two Carriers, Travellers, Attendants,
	and an Ostler.
	(Sheriff:)
	(Vintner:)
	(Chamberlain:)
	(First Carrier:)
	(Second Carrier:)
	(First Traveller:)
	(Servant:)
	(Messenger:)
	(Ostler:)



SCENE	England.




	1 KING HENRY IV


ACT I



SCENE I	London. The palace.


	[Enter KING HENRY, LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER, the EARL
	of WESTMORELAND, SIR WALTER BLUNT, and others]

KING HENRY IV	So shaken as we are, so wan with care,
	Find we a time for frighted peace to pant,
	And breathe short-winded accents of new broils
	To be commenced in strands afar remote.
	No more the thirsty entrance of this soil
	Shall daub her lips with her own children's blood;
	Nor more shall trenching war channel her fields,
	Nor bruise her flowerets with the armed hoofs
	Of hostile paces: those opposed eyes,
	Which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven,
	All of one nature, of one substance bred,
	Did lately meet in the intestine shock
	And furious close of civil butchery
	Shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks,
	March all one way and be no more opposed
	Against acquaintance, kindred and allies:
	The edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife,
	No more shall cut his master. Therefore, friends,
	As far as to the sepulchre of Christ,
	Whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross
	We are impressed and engaged to fight,
	Forthwith a power of English shall we levy;
	Whose arms were moulded in their mothers' womb
	To chase these pagans in those holy fields
	Over whose acres walk'd those blessed feet
	Which fourteen hundred years ago were nail'd
	For our advantage on the bitter cross.
	But this our purpose now is twelve month old,
	And bootless 'tis to tell you we will go:
	Therefore we meet not now. Then let me hear
	Of you, my gentle cousin Westmoreland,
	What yesternight our council did decree
	In forwarding this dear expedience.

WESTMORELAND	My liege, this haste was hot in question,
	And many limits of the charge set down
	But yesternight: when all athwart there came
	A post from Wales loaden with heavy news;
	Whose worst was, that the noble Mortimer,
	Leading the men of Herefordshire to fight
	Against the irregular and wild Glendower,
	Was by the rude hands of that Welshman taken,
	A thousand of his people butchered;
	Upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse,
	Such beastly shameless transformation,
	By those Welshwomen done as may not be
	Without much shame retold or spoken of.

KING HENRY IV	It seems then that the tidings of this broil
	Brake off our business for the Holy Land.

WESTMORELAND	This match'd with other did, my gracious lord;
	For more uneven and unwelcome news
	Came from the north and thus it did import:
	On Holy-rood day, the gallant Hotspur there,
	Young Harry Percy and brave Archibald,
	That ever-valiant and approved Scot,
	At Holmedon met,
	Where they did spend a sad and bloody hour,
	As by discharge of their artillery,
	And shape of likelihood, the news was told;
	For he that brought them, in the very heat
	And pride of their contention did take horse,
	Uncertain of the issue any way.

KING HENRY IV	Here is a dear, a true industrious friend,
	Sir Walter Blunt, new lighted from his horse.
	Stain'd with the variation of each soil
	Betwixt that Holmedon and this seat of ours;
	And he hath brought us smooth and welcome news.
	The Earl of Douglas is discomfited:
	Ten thousand bold Scots, two and twenty knights,
	Balk'd in their own blood did Sir Walter see
	On Holmedon's plains. Of prisoners, Hotspur took
	Mordake the Earl of Fife, and eldest son
	To beaten Douglas; and the Earl of Athol,
	Of Murray, Angus, and Menteith:
	And is not this an honourable spoil?
	A gallant prize? ha, cousin, is it not?

WESTMORELAND	In faith,
	It is a conquest for a prince to boast of.

KING HENRY IV	Yea, there thou makest me sad and makest me sin
	In envy that my Lord Northumberland
	Should be the father to so blest a son,
	A son who is the theme of honour's tongue;
	Amongst a grove, the very straightest plant;
	Who is sweet Fortune's minion and her pride:
	Whilst I, by looking on the praise of him,
	See riot and dishonour stain the brow
	Of my young Harry. O that it could be proved
	That some night-tripping fairy had exchanged
	In cradle-clothes our children where they lay,
	And call'd mine Percy, his Plantagenet!
	Then would I have his Harry, and he mine.
	But let him from my thoughts. What think you, coz,
	Of this young Percy's pride? the prisoners,
	Which he in this adventure hath surprised,
	To his own use he keeps; and sends me word,
	I shall have none but Mordake Earl of Fife.

WESTMORELAND	This is his uncle's teaching; this is Worcester,
	Malevolent to you in all aspects;
	Which makes him prune himself, and bristle up
	The crest of youth against your dignity.

KING HENRY IV	But I have sent for him to answer this;
	And for this cause awhile we must neglect
	Our holy purpose to Jerusalem.
	Cousin, on Wednesday next our council we
	Will hold at Windsor; so inform the lords:
	But come yourself with speed to us again;
	For more is to be said and to be done
	Than out of anger can be uttered.

WESTMORELAND	I will, my liege.

	[Exeunt]




	1 KING HENRY IV


ACT I



SCENE II	London. An apartment of the Prince's.


	[Enter the PRINCE OF WALES and FALSTAFF]

FALSTAFF	Now, Hal, what time of day is it, lad?

PRINCE HENRY	Thou art so fat-witted, with drinking of old sack
	and unbuttoning thee after supper and sleeping upon
	benches after noon, that thou hast forgotten to
	demand that truly which thou wouldst truly know.
	What a devil hast thou to do with the time of the
	day? Unless hours were cups of sack and minutes
	capons and clocks the tongues of bawds and dials the
	signs of leaping-houses and the blessed sun himself
	a fair hot wench in flame-coloured taffeta, I see no
	reason why thou shouldst be so superfluous to demand
	the time of the day.

FALSTAFF	Indeed, you come near me now, Hal; for we that take
	purses go by the moon and the seven stars, and not
	by Phoebus, he,'that wandering knight so fair.' And,
	I prithee, sweet wag, when thou art king, as, God
	save thy grace,--majesty I should say, for grace
	thou wilt have none,--

PRINCE HENRY	What, none?

FALSTAFF	No, by my troth, not so much as will serve to
	prologue to an egg and butter.

PRINCE HENRY	Well, how then? come, roundly, roundly.

FALSTAFF	Marry, then, sweet wag, when thou art king, let not
	us that are squires of the night's body be called
	thieves of the day's beauty: let us be Diana's
	foresters, gentlemen of the shade, minions of the
	moon; and let men say we be men of good government,
	being governed, as the sea is, by our noble and
	chaste mistress the moon, under whose countenance we steal.

PRINCE HENRY	Thou sayest well, and it holds well too; for the
	fortune of us that are the moon's men doth ebb and
	flow like the sea, being governed, as the sea is,
	by the moon. As, for proof, now: a purse of gold
	most resolutely snatched on Monday night and most
	dissolutely spent on Tuesday morning; got with
	swearing 'Lay by' and spent with crying 'Bring in;'
	now in as low an ebb as the foot of the ladder
	and by and by in as high a flow as the ridge of the gallows.

FALSTAFF	By the Lord, thou sayest true, lad. And is not my
	hostess of the tavern a most sweet wench?

PRINCE HENRY	As the honey of Hybla, my old lad of the castle. And
	is not a buff jerkin a most sweet robe of durance?

FALSTAFF	How now, how now, mad wag! what, in thy quips and
	thy quiddities? what a plague have I to do with a
	buff jerkin?

PRINCE HENRY	Why, what a pox have I to do with my hostess of the tavern?

FALSTAFF	Well, thou hast called her to a reckoning many a
	time and oft.

PRINCE HENRY	Did I ever call for thee to pay thy part?

FALSTAFF	No; I'll give thee thy due, thou hast paid all there.

PRINCE HENRY	Yea, and elsewhere, so far as my coin would stretch;
	and where it would not, I have used my credit.

FALSTAFF	Yea, and so used it that were it not here apparent
	that thou art heir apparent--But, I prithee, sweet
	wag, shall there be gallows standing in England when
	thou art king? and resolution thus fobbed as it is
	with the rusty curb of old father antic the law? Do
	not thou, when thou art king, hang a thief.

PRINCE HENRY	No; thou shalt.

FALSTAFF	Shall I? O rare! By the Lord, I'll be a brave judge.

PRINCE HENRY	Thou judgest false already: I mean, thou shalt have
	the hanging of the thieves and so become a rare hangman.

FALSTAFF	Well, Hal, well; and in some sort it jumps with my
	humour as well as waiting in the court, I can tell
	you.

PRINCE HENRY	For obtaining of suits?

FALSTAFF	Yea, for obtaining of suits, whereof the hangman
	hath no lean wardrobe. 'Sblood, I am as melancholy
	as a gib cat or a lugged bear.

PRINCE HENRY	Or an old lion, or a lover's lute.

FALSTAFF	Yea, or the drone of a Lincolnshire bagpipe.

PRINCE HENRY	What sayest thou to a hare, or the melancholy of
	Moor-ditch?

FALSTAFF	Thou hast the most unsavoury similes and art indeed
	the most comparative, rascalliest, sweet young
	prince. But, Hal, I prithee, trouble me no more
	with vanity. I would to God thou and I knew where a
	commodity of good names were to be bought. An old
	lord of the council rated me the other day in the
	street about you, sir, but I marked him not; and yet
	he talked very wisely, but I regarded him not; and
	yet he talked wisely, and in the street too.

PRINCE HENRY	Thou didst well; for wisdom cries out in the
	streets, and no man regards it.

FALSTAFF	O, thou hast damnable iteration and art indeed able
	to corrupt a saint. Thou hast done much harm upon
	me, Hal; God forgive thee for it! Before I knew
	thee, Hal, I knew nothing; and now am I, if a man
	should speak truly, little better than one of the
	wicked. I must give over this life, and I will give
	it over: by the Lord, and I do not, I am a villain:
	I'll be damned for never a king's son in
	Christendom.

PRINCE HENRY	Where shall we take a purse tomorrow, Jack?

FALSTAFF	'Zounds, where thou wilt, lad; I'll make one; an I
	do not, call me villain and baffle me.

PRINCE HENRY	I see a good amendment of life in thee; from praying
	to purse-taking.

FALSTAFF	Why, Hal, 'tis my vocation, Hal; 'tis no sin for a
	man to labour in his vocation.

	[Enter POINS]

	Poins! Now shall we know if Gadshill have set a
	match. O, if men were to be saved by merit, what
	hole in hell were hot enough for him? This is the
	most omnipotent villain that ever cried 'Stand' to
	a true man.

PRINCE HENRY	Good morrow, Ned.

POINS	Good morrow, sweet Hal. What says Monsieur Remorse?
	what says Sir John Sack and Sugar? Jack! how
	agrees the devil and thee about thy soul, that thou
	soldest him on Good-Friday last for a cup of Madeira
	and a cold capon's leg?

PRINCE HENRY	Sir John stands to his word, the devil shall have
	his bargain; for he was never yet a breaker of
	proverbs: he will give the devil his due.

POINS	Then art thou damned for keeping thy word with the devil.

PRINCE HENRY	Else he had been damned for cozening the devil.

POINS	But, my lads, my lads, to-morrow morning, by four
	o'clock, early at Gadshill! there are pilgrims going
	to Canterbury with rich offerings, and traders
	riding to London with fat purses: I have vizards
	for you all; you have horses for yourselves:
	Gadshill lies to-night in Rochester: I have bespoke
	supper to-morrow night in Eastcheap: we may do it
	as secure as sleep. If you will go, I will stuff
	your purses full of crowns; if you will not, tarry
	at home and be hanged.

FALSTAFF	Hear ye, Yedward; if I tarry at home and go not,
	I'll hang you for going.

POINS	You will, chops?

FALSTAFF	Hal, wilt thou make one?

PRINCE HENRY	Who, I rob? I a thief? not I, by my faith.

FALSTAFF	There's neither honesty, manhood, nor good
	fellowship in thee, nor thou camest not of the blood
	royal, if thou darest not stand for ten shillings.

PRINCE HENRY	Well then, once in my days I'll be a madcap.

FALSTAFF	Why, that's well said.

PRINCE HENRY	Well, come what will, I'll tarry at home.

FALSTAFF	By the Lord, I'll be a traitor then, when thou art king.

PRINCE HENRY	I care not.

POINS	Sir John, I prithee, leave the prince and me alone:
	I will lay him down such reasons for this adventure
	that he shall go.

FALSTAFF	Well, God give thee the spirit of persuasion and him
	the ears of profiting, that what thou speakest may
	move and what he hears may be believed, that the
	true prince may, for recreation sake, prove a false
	thief; for the poor abuses of the time want
	countenance. Farewell: you shall find me in Eastcheap.

PRINCE HENRY	Farewell, thou latter spring! farewell, All-hallown summer!

	[Exit Falstaff]

POINS	Now, my good sweet honey lord, ride with us
	to-morrow: I have a jest to execute that I cannot
	manage alone. Falstaff, Bardolph, Peto and Gadshill
	shall rob those men that we have already waylaid:
	yourself and I will not be there; and when they
	have the booty, if you and I do not rob them, cut
	this head off from my shoulders.

PRINCE HENRY	How shall we part with them in setting forth?

POINS	Why, we will set forth before or after them, and
	appoint them a place of meeting, wherein it is at
	our pleasure to fail, and then will they adventure
	upon the exploit themselves; which they shall have
	no sooner achieved, but we'll set upon them.

PRINCE HENRY	Yea, but 'tis like that they will know us by our
	horses, by our habits and by every other
	appointment, to be ourselves.

POINS	Tut! our horses they shall not see: I'll tie them
	in the wood; our vizards we will change after we
	leave them: and, sirrah, I have cases of buckram
	for the nonce, to immask our noted outward garments.

PRINCE HENRY	Yea, but I doubt they will be too hard for us.

POINS	Well, for two of them, I know them to be as
	true-bred cowards as ever turned back; and for the
	third, if he fight longer than he sees reason, I'll
	forswear arms. The virtue of this jest will be, the
	incomprehensible lies that this same fat rogue will
	tell us when we meet at supper: how thirty, at
	least, he fought with; what wards, what blows, what
	extremities he endured; and in the reproof of this
	lies the jest.

PRINCE HENRY	Well, I'll go with thee: provide us all things
	necessary and meet me to-morrow night in Eastcheap;
	there I'll sup. Farewell.

POINS	Farewell, my lord.

	[Exit Poins]

PRINCE HENRY	I know you all, and will awhile uphold
	The unyoked humour of your idleness:
	Yet herein will I imitate the sun,
	Who doth permit the base contagious clouds
	To smother up his beauty from the world,
	That, when he please again to be himself,
	Being wanted, he may be more wonder'd at,
	By breaking through the foul and ugly mists
	Of vapours that did seem to strangle him.
	If all the year were playing holidays,
	To sport would be as tedious as to work;
	But when they seldom come, they wish'd for come,
	And nothing pleaseth but rare accidents.
	So, when this loose behavior I throw off
	And pay the debt I never promised,
	By how much better than my word I am,
	By so much shall I falsify men's hopes;
	And like bright metal on a sullen ground,
	My reformation, glittering o'er my fault,
	Shall show more goodly and attract more eyes
	Than that which hath no foil to set it off.
	I'll so offend, to make offence a skill;
	Redeeming time when men think least I will.

	[Exit]




	1 KING HENRY IV


ACT I



SCENE III	London. The palace.


	[Enter the KING, NORTHUMBERLAND, WORCESTER, HOTSPUR,
	SIR WALTER BLUNT, with others]

KING HENRY IV	My blood hath been too cold and temperate,
	Unapt to stir at these indignities,
	And you have found me; for accordingly
	You tread upon my patience: but be sure
	I will from henceforth rather be myself,
	Mighty and to be fear'd, than my condition;
	Which hath been smooth as oil, soft as young down,
	And therefore lost that title of respect
	Which the proud soul ne'er pays but to the proud.

EARL OF WORCESTER	Our house, my sovereign liege, little deserves
	The scourge of greatness to be used on it;
	And that same greatness too which our own hands
	Have holp to make so portly.

NORTHUMBERLAND	My lord.--

KING HENRY IV	Worcester, get thee gone; for I do see
	Danger and disobedience in thine eye:
	O, sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory,
	And majesty might never yet endure
	The moody frontier of a servant brow.
	You have good leave to leave us: when we need
	Your use and counsel, we shall send for you.

	[Exit Worcester]

	You were about to speak.

	[To North]

NORTHUMBERLAND	Yea, my good lord.
	Those prisoners in your highness' name demanded,
	Which Harry Percy here at Holmedon took,
	Were, as he says, not with such strength denied
	As is deliver'd to your majesty:
	Either envy, therefore, or misprison
	Is guilty of this fault and not my son.

HOTSPUR	My liege, I did deny no prisoners.
	But I remember, when the fight was done,
	When I was dry with rage and extreme toil,
	Breathless and faint, leaning upon my sword,
	Came there a certain lord, neat, and trimly dress'd,
	Fresh as a bridegroom; and his chin new reap'd
	Show'd like a stubble-land at harvest-home;
	He was perfumed like a milliner;
	And 'twixt his finger and his thumb he held
	A pouncet-box, which ever and anon
	He gave his nose and took't away again;
	Who therewith angry, when it next came there,
	Took it in snuff; and still he smiled and talk'd,
	And as the soldiers bore dead bodies by,
	He call'd them untaught knaves, unmannerly,
	To bring a slovenly unhandsome corse
	Betwixt the wind and his nobility.
	With many holiday and lady terms
	He question'd me; amongst the rest, demanded
	My prisoners in your majesty's behalf.
	I then, all smarting with my wounds being cold,
	To be so pester'd with a popinjay,
	Out of my grief and my impatience,
	Answer'd neglectingly I know not what,
	He should or he should not; for he made me mad
	To see him shine so brisk and smell so sweet
	And talk so like a waiting-gentlewoman
	Of guns and drums and wounds,--God save the mark!--
	And telling me the sovereign'st thing on earth
	Was parmaceti for an inward bruise;
	And that it was great pity, so it was,
	This villanous salt-petre should be digg'd
	Out of the bowels of the harmless earth,
	Which many a good tall fellow had destroy'd
	So cowardly; and but for these vile guns,
	He would himself have been a soldier.
	This bald unjointed chat of his, my lord,
	I answer'd indirectly, as I said;
	And I beseech you, let not his report
	Come current for an accusation
	Betwixt my love and your high majesty.

SIR WALTER BLUNT	The circumstance consider'd, good my lord,
	Whate'er Lord Harry Percy then had said
	To such a person and in such a place,
	At such a time, with all the rest retold,
	May reasonably die and never rise
	To do him wrong or any way impeach
	What then he said, so he unsay it now.

KING HENRY IV	Why, yet he doth deny his prisoners,
	But with proviso and exception,
	That we at our own charge shall ransom straight
	His brother-in-law, the foolish Mortimer;
	Who, on my soul, hath wilfully betray'd
	The lives of those that he did lead to fight
	Against that great magician, damn'd Glendower,
	Whose daughter, as we hear, the Earl of March
	Hath lately married. Shall our coffers, then,
	Be emptied to redeem a traitor home?
	Shall we but treason? and indent with fears,
	When they have lost and forfeited themselves?
	No, on the barren mountains let him starve;
	For I shall never hold that man my friend
	Whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost
	To ransom home revolted Mortimer.

HOTSPUR	Revolted Mortimer!
	He never did fall off, my sovereign liege,
	But by the chance of war; to prove that true
	Needs no more but one tongue for all those wounds,
	Those mouthed wounds, which valiantly he took
	When on the gentle Severn's sedgy bank,
	In single opposition, hand to hand,
	He did confound the best part of an hour
	In changing hardiment with great Glendower:
	Three times they breathed and three times did
	they drink,
	Upon agreement, of swift Severn's flood;
	Who then, affrighted with their bloody looks,
	Ran fearfully among the trembling reeds,
	And hid his crisp head in the hollow bank,
	Bloodstained with these valiant combatants.
	Never did base and rotten policy
	Colour her working with such deadly wounds;
	Nor could the noble Mortimer
	Receive so many, and all willingly:
	Then let not him be slander'd with revolt.

KING HENRY IV	Thou dost belie him, Percy, thou dost belie him;
	He never did encounter with Glendower:
	I tell thee,
	He durst as well have met the devil alone
	As Owen Glendower for an enemy.
	Art thou not ashamed? But, sirrah, henceforth
	Let me not hear you speak of Mortimer:
	Send me your prisoners with the speediest means,
	Or you shall hear in such a kind from me
	As will displease you. My Lord Northumberland,
	We licence your departure with your son.
	Send us your prisoners, or you will hear of it.

	[Exeunt King Henry, Blunt, and train]

HOTSPUR	An if the devil come and roar for them,
	I will not send them: I will after straight
	And tell him so; for I will ease my heart,
	Albeit I make a hazard of my head.

NORTHUMBERLAND	What, drunk with choler? stay and pause awhile:
	Here comes your uncle.

	[Re-enter WORCESTER]

HOTSPUR	Speak of Mortimer!
	'Zounds, I will speak of him; and let my soul
	Want mercy, if I do not join with him:
	Yea, on his part I'll empty all these veins,
	And shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust,
	But I will lift the down-trod Mortimer
	As high in the air as this unthankful king,
	As this ingrate and canker'd Bolingbroke.

NORTHUMBERLAND	Brother, the king hath made your nephew mad.

EARL OF WORCESTER	Who struck this heat up after I was gone?

HOTSPUR	He will, forsooth, have all my prisoners;
	And when I urged the ransom once again
	Of my wife's brother, then his cheek look'd pale,
	And on my face he turn'd an eye of death,
	Trembling even at the name of Mortimer.

EARL OF WORCESTER	I cannot blame him: was not he proclaim'd
	By Richard that dead is the next of blood?

NORTHUMBERLAND	He was; I heard the proclamation:
	And then it was when the unhappy king,
	--Whose wrongs in us God pardon!--did set forth
	Upon his Irish expedition;
	From whence he intercepted did return
	To be deposed and shortly murdered.

EARL OF WORCESTER	And for whose death we in the world's wide mouth
	Live scandalized and foully spoken of.

HOTSPUR	But soft, I pray you; did King Richard then
	Proclaim my brother Edmund Mortimer
	Heir to the crown?

NORTHUMBERLAND	He did; myself did hear it.

HOTSPUR	Nay, then I cannot blame his cousin king,
	That wished him on the barren mountains starve.
	But shall it be that you, that set the crown
	Upon the head of this forgetful man
	And for his sake wear the detested blot
	Of murderous subornation, shall it be,
	That you a world of curses undergo,
	Being the agents, or base second means,
	The cords, the ladder, or the hangman rather?
	O, pardon me that I descend so low,
	To show the line and the predicament
	Wherein you range under this subtle king;
	Shall it for shame be spoken in these days,
	Or fill up chronicles in time to come,
	That men of your nobility and power
	Did gage them both in an unjust behalf,
	As both of you--God pardon it!--have done,
	To put down Richard, that sweet lovely rose,
	An plant this thorn, this canker, Bolingbroke?
	And shall it in more shame be further spoken,
	That you are fool'd, discarded and shook off
	By him for whom these shames ye underwent?
	No; yet time serves wherein you may redeem
	Your banish'd honours and restore yourselves
	Into the good thoughts of the world again,
	Revenge the jeering and disdain'd contempt
	Of this proud king, who studies day and night
	To answer all the debt he owes to you
	Even with the bloody payment of your deaths:
	Therefore, I say--

EARL OF WORCESTER	                  Peace, cousin, say no more:
	And now I will unclasp a secret book,
	And to your quick-conceiving discontents
	I'll read you matter deep and dangerous,
	As full of peril and adventurous spirit
	As to o'er-walk a current roaring loud
	On the unsteadfast footing of a spear.

HOTSPUR	If he fall in, good night! or sink or swim:
	Send danger from the east unto the west,
	So honour cross it from the north to south,
	And let them grapple: O, the blood more stirs
	To rouse a lion than to start a hare!

NORTHUMBERLAND	Imagination of some great exploit
	Drives him beyond the bounds of patience.

HOTSPUR	By heaven, methinks it were an easy leap,
	To pluck bright honour from the pale-faced moon,
	Or dive into the bottom of the deep,
	Where fathom-line could never touch the ground,
	And pluck up drowned honour by the locks;
	So he that doth redeem her thence might wear
	Without corrival, all her dignities:
	But out upon this half-faced fellowship!

EARL OF WORCESTER	He apprehends a world of figures here,
	But not the form of what he should attend.
	Good cousin, give me audience for a while.

HOTSPUR	I cry you mercy.

EARL OF WORCESTER	                  Those same noble Scots
	That are your prisoners,--

HOTSPUR	I'll keep them all;
	By God, he shall not have a Scot of them;
	No, if a Scot would save his soul, he shall not:
	I'll keep them, by this hand.

EARL OF WORCESTER	You start away
	And lend no ear unto my purposes.
	Those prisoners you shall keep.

HOTSPUR	Nay, I will; that's flat:
	He said he would not ransom Mortimer;
	Forbad my tongue to speak of Mortimer;
	But I will find him when he lies asleep,
	And in his ear I'll holla 'Mortimer!'
	Nay,
	I'll have a starling shall be taught to speak
	Nothing but 'Mortimer,' and give it him
	To keep his anger still in motion.

EARL OF WORCESTER	Hear you, cousin; a word.

HOTSPUR	All studies here I solemnly defy,
	Save how to gall and pinch this Bolingbroke:
	And that same sword-and-buckler Prince of Wales,
	But that I think his father loves him not
	And would be glad he met with some mischance,
	I would have him poison'd with a pot of ale.

EARL OF WORCESTER	Farewell, kinsman: I'll talk to you
	When you are better temper'd to attend.

NORTHUMBERLAND	Why, what a wasp-stung and impatient fool
	Art thou to break into this woman's mood,
	Tying thine ear to no tongue but thine own!

HOTSPUR	Why, look you, I am whipp'd and scourged with rods,
	Nettled and stung with pismires, when I hear
	Of this vile politician, Bolingbroke.
	In Richard's time,--what do you call the place?--
	A plague upon it, it is in Gloucestershire;
	'Twas where the madcap duke his uncle kept,
	His uncle York; where I first bow'd my knee
	Unto this king of smiles, this Bolingbroke,--
	'Sblood!--
	When you and he came back from Ravenspurgh.

NORTHUMBERLAND	At Berkley castle.

HOTSPUR	You say true:
	Why, what a candy deal of courtesy
	This fawning greyhound then did proffer me!
	Look,'when his infant fortune came to age,'
	And 'gentle Harry Percy,' and 'kind cousin;'
	O, the devil take such cozeners! God forgive me!
	Good uncle, tell your tale; I have done.

EARL OF WORCESTER	Nay, if you have not, to it again;
	We will stay your leisure.

HOTSPUR	I have done, i' faith.

EARL OF WORCESTER	Then once more to your Scottish prisoners.
	Deliver them up without their ransom straight,
	And make the Douglas' son your only mean
	For powers in Scotland; which, for divers reasons
	Which I shall send you written, be assured,
	Will easily be granted. You, my lord,

	[To Northumberland]

	Your son in Scotland being thus employ'd,
	Shall secretly into the bosom creep
	Of that same noble prelate, well beloved,
	The archbishop.

HOTSPUR	Of York, is it not?

EARL OF WORCESTER	True; who bears hard
	His brother's death at Bristol, the Lord Scroop.
	I speak not this in estimation,
	As what I think might be, but what I know
	Is ruminated, plotted and set down,
	And only stays but to behold the face
	Of that occasion that shall bring it on.

HOTSPUR	I smell it: upon my life, it will do well.

NORTHUMBERLAND	Before the game is afoot, thou still let'st slip.

HOTSPUR	Why, it cannot choose but be a noble plot;
	And then the power of Scotland and of York,
	To join with Mortimer, ha?

EARL OF WORCESTER	And so they shall.

HOTSPUR	In faith, it is exceedingly well aim'd.

EARL OF WORCESTER	And 'tis no little reason bids us speed,
	To save our heads by raising of a head;
	For, bear ourselves as even as we can,
	The king will always think him in our debt,
	And think we think ourselves unsatisfied,
	Till he hath found a time to pay us home:
	And see already how he doth begin
	To make us strangers to his looks of love.

HOTSPUR	He does, he does: we'll be revenged on him.

EARL OF WORCESTER	Cousin, farewell: no further go in this
	Than I by letters shall direct your course.
	When time is ripe, which will be suddenly,
	I'll steal to Glendower and Lord Mortimer;
	Where you and Douglas and our powers at once,
	As I will fashion it, shall happily meet,
	To bear our fortunes in our own strong arms,
	Which now we hold at much uncertainty.

NORTHUMBERLAND	Farewell, good brother: we shall thrive, I trust.

HOTSPUR	Uncle, Adieu: O, let the hours be short
	Till fields and blows and groans applaud our sport!

	[Exeunt]




	1 KING HENRY IV


ACT II



SCENE I	Rochester. An inn yard.


	[Enter a Carrier with a lantern in his hand]

First Carrier	Heigh-ho! an it be not four by the day, I'll be
	hanged: Charles' wain is over the new chimney, and
	yet our horse not packed. What, ostler!

Ostler	[Within]   Anon, anon.

First Carrier	I prithee, Tom, beat Cut's saddle, put a few flocks
	in the point; poor jade, is wrung in the withers out
	of all cess.

	[Enter another Carrier]

Second Carrier	Peas and beans are as dank here as a dog, and that
	is the next way to give poor jades the bots: this
	house is turned upside down since Robin Ostler died.

First Carrier	Poor fellow, never joyed since the price of oats
	rose; it was the death of him.

Second Carrier	I think this be the most villanous house in all
	London road for fleas: I am stung like a tench.

First Carrier	Like a tench! by the mass, there is ne'er a king
	christen could be better bit than I have been since
	the first cock.

Second Carrier	Why, they will allow us ne'er a jordan, and then we
	leak in your chimney; and your chamber-lie breeds
	fleas like a loach.

First Carrier	What, ostler! come away and be hanged!

Second Carrier	I have a gammon of bacon and two razors of ginger,
	to be delivered as far as Charing-cross.

First Carrier	God's body! the turkeys in my pannier are quite
	starved. What, ostler! A plague on thee! hast thou
	never an eye in thy head? canst not hear? An
	'twere not as good deed as drink, to break the pate
	on thee, I am a very villain. Come, and be hanged!
	hast thou no faith in thee?

	[Enter GADSHILL]

GADSHILL	Good morrow, carriers. What's o'clock?

First Carrier	I think it be two o'clock.

GADSHILL	I pray thee lend me thy lantern, to see my gelding
	in the stable.

First Carrier	Nay, by God, soft; I know a trick worth two of that, i' faith.

GADSHILL	I pray thee, lend me thine.

Second Carrier	Ay, when? can'st tell? Lend me thy lantern, quoth
	he? marry, I'll see thee hanged first.

GADSHILL	Sirrah carrier, what time do you mean to come to London?

Second Carrier	Time enough to go to bed with a candle, I warrant
	thee. Come, neighbour Mugs, we'll call up the
	gentleman: they will along with company, for they
	have great charge.

	[Exeunt carriers]

GADSHILL	What, ho! chamberlain!

Chamberlain	[Within]  At hand, quoth pick-purse.

GADSHILL	That's even as fair as--at hand, quoth the
	chamberlain; for thou variest no more from picking
	of purses than giving direction doth from labouring;
	thou layest the plot how.

	[Enter Chamberlain]

Chamberlain	Good morrow, Master Gadshill. It holds current that
	I told you yesternight: there's a franklin in the
	wild of Kent hath brought three hundred marks with
	him in gold: I heard him tell it to one of his
	company last night at supper; a kind of auditor; one
	that hath abundance of charge too, God knows what.
	They are up already, and call for eggs and butter;
	they will away presently.

